---
layout: post
title: Buechi mu calculus formula explained
---

The original source is: [http://pub.ist.ac.at/gametheory/Lecture4.pdf](http://
pub.ist.ac.at/gametheory/Lecture4.pdf)

I found the proof on the page 5 somewhat unclear, so give here my
understanding of it, and also give smaller (but more difficult to remember),
formula and proof for the winning set in Buechi games.

## Original Formula

The original formula for a winning set in Buechi game is:

$$ Y = \nu Y \mu X. [(B \cap Pre_1(Y)) \cup (\neg B \cap Pre_1(X))]$$

The idea of the proof is to show that in the winning region $$Y^*$$ the first
player: a) can always enforce the game to visit a state in $$ B$$; b) after
visiting state in $$ B$$ the first player can again reach the winning set $$
Y^*$$. This together means that the first player visits final states
infinitely often.

Lets consider the greatest fixpoint first and fix $$ Y^*$$:

$$ Y^* = \mu X. [(B \cap Pre_1(Y^*)) \cup (\neg B \cap Pre_1(X))]$$

Let $$ T=B \cap Pre_1(Y^*)$$, then $$ Y^* = \mu X. [T \cup (\neg B \cap
Pre_1(X))]$$, which reminds the winning set for reachability game, except
additional $$ \neg B$$. It can be shown, for example by contraction, that it
is more smaller than reachability set and therefore:

$$ Y^* \subseteq \ll 1 \gg (\diamond (B \cap Pre_1(Y^*)))$$.

Lets show that from any state in $$ Y^*$$ the first player can again reach
state in $$ Y^*$$. In the original source this is proved by considering all
possible cases: $$ x \in T$$ and $$ x \notin T$$, and proving that in both
cases the first player can reach $$ Y^*$$.

But hey, look! Any state in $$ Y^*$$ can reach $$ B \cap Pre_1(Y^*)$$, and
from the state in $$ Pre_1(Y^*)$$ the first player can always reach $$ Y^*$$.
Therefore, the the statement is correct and there is no need to consider all
cases as in the original source.

OK, we showed that if the first player stays in $$ Y^*$$, then Buechi
condition is satisfied. What about other direction?

## Modified Formula

The reasoning above could also apply if we remove $$ \neg B$$ from the
formula. Therefore the formula for the winning set of Buechi game becomes:

$$ Y = \nu Y \mu X. [(B \cap Pre_1(Y)) \cup Pre_1(X)]$$

Lets check the original proof and see if it works for this case. Again we
remove greatest fix point operator by fixing $$ Y^*$$:

$$ Y^* = \mu X. [(B \cap Pre_1(Y^*)) \cup Pre_1(X)]$$

Let $$ T=B \cap Pre_1(Y^*)$$, then $$ Y^* = \mu X. [T \cup Pre_1(X)]$$, which
is the winning set for reachability game, therefore:

$$ Y^* = \ll 1 \gg (\diamond (B \cap Pre_1(Y^*)))$$.

By using the same argument as for "original formula", the first player can
always reach states in $$Pre_1(Y^*)$$ and from there -- the state in $$Y^*$$.
Therefore, the Buechi condition is satisfied and this modified formula
represents the winning condition for Buechi game.

## The other direction

What if the set $$ Y^*$$ represents just the subset of the winning set, or
even just always empty?

Idea only. It should be possible to prove it by contradiction. Assume there is
a state $$ x$$ from which there is a winning strategy for the first player.
Consider the infinite path generated by this state. It contains (at least) one
state in $$ B$$ infinitely often. Then lets make $$ Y^* = states-of-that-
path$$. Such $$ Y^*$$ satisfies the original formula. Contradiction. Some
details are omitted and I am not sure that this way will prove the other
direction but would try it first.

Have fun in your learning!

